# Extended Syntax

In addition to *regular* syntax extensions -- which are shown below -- a specialty of NoTex is the integral support of [MathJax], which is a superb JavaScript display engine for mathematics that *simply* works in all browsers!

## Mathematics with $\textbf{LaTex}$

We will *not* at all document all the features [MathJax] supports (nor of [LaTex] -- a high-quality typesetting system), but simply demonstrate two different use cases.

### Embedded Formulae

To embed a mathematical formula directly into a paragraph surround it with *single* dollar (<code>&dollar;</code>) signs:

```latex
The number $e$ is the limit of $(1+1/n)^n$ as $n$ approaches infinity.
```

where the rendered output looks like this:

> The number $e$ is the limit of $(1+1/n)^n$ as $n$ approaches infinity.

### Centered Formulae

To center a mathematical formula *outside* of a paragraph surround it with *double* dollar (<code>&dollar;&dollar;</code>) signs:

```latex
The number $e$ can also be calculated as the sum of an infinite series:

$$
e = \sum_{i=0}^{\infty}1\big{/}n! = \frac{1}{1}+\frac{1}{1}+⋯
$$
```

where the line breaks after the *initial* and before the *trailing* double dollars (\$\$) are  *optional*. The rendered output looks like this:

> The number $e$ can also be calculated as the sum of an infinite series:
> $$e = \sum_{i=0}^{\infty}1\big{/}n! = \frac{1}{1}+\frac{1}{1}+⋯$$

[MathJax] supports *many* more [LaTex] commands. Also, have a look at some of the examples at www.mathjax.org/#samples. Further, check the basic [MathJax tutorial and quick reference][0] for more information.

[0]: https://math.meta.stackexchange.com/questions/5020/mathjax-basic-tutorial-and-quick-reference

## Videos

### YouTube

You insert YouTube videos by using a similar syntax as for referencing an image, but you require an initial at sign (`@`) -- instead of an exclamation mark:

```md
@[youtube](mIStB5X4U8M)
```
where shortening a long YouTube link down to simply the video *identifier* is possible. The rendered output looks like this:

> @[youtube](mIStB5X4U8M)

### Vimeo

You insert Vimeo videos by using a similar syntax as for referencing an image, but again you require an initial at sign (`@`):

```md
@[vimeo](7306407)
```
where shortening a long Vimeo link down to simply the video *identifier* is possible. The rendered output looks like this:

> @[vimeo](7306407)

## Tables

To add a table, use three or more hyphens (`---`) to create each column's header, and use pipes (`|`) to separate each column. You can optionally add pipes on either end of the table:

```md
| Syntax      | Description |
| ----------- | ----------- |
| Header      | Title       |
| Paragraph   | Text        |
```

where the rendered output looks like this:

> | Syntax      | Description |
> | ----------- | ----------- |
> | Header      | Title       |
> | Paragraph   | Text        |


Cell widths can vary, as shown below. The rendered output will look the same.

```md
| Syntax | Description |
| --- | ----------- |
| Header | Title |
| Paragraph | Text |
```

### Alignment

You can align text in the columns to the left, right, or center by adding a colon (`:`) to the left, right, or on both side of the hyphens within the header row.

```md
| Syntax    | Description | Test Text     |
| :---      |    :----:   |          ---: |
| Header    | Title       | Here's this   |
| Paragraph | Text        | And more      |
```

where the rendered output looks like this:

> | Syntax    | Description | Test Text     |
> | :---      |    :----:   |          ---: |
> | Header    | Title       | Here's this   |
> | Paragraph | Text        | And more      |

### Formatting Text in Tables

You can format the text within tables. For example, you can add links, code (words or phrases in tick marks (`` ` ``) only, not code blocks), and emphasis. You can't add headings, block-quotes, lists, horizontal rules, images, or HTML tags.

### Escaping Pipe Characters in Tables

You can display a pipe (`|`) character in a table by using its HTML character code (`&#124;`).

## Fenced Code Blocks

The basic Markdown syntax allows you to create code blocks by indenting lines by four spaces or one tab. If you find that inconvenient, try using fenced code blocks. You can use three tick marks (<code>&#96;&#96;&#96;</code>) or three tildes (`~~~`) on the lines before and after the code block. The best part? You don't have to indent any lines!

~~~
```
{
  "firstName": "John",
  "lastName": "Smith",
  "age": 25
}
```
~~~

where the rendered output looks like this:

> ```
> {
>   "firstName": "John",
>   "lastName": "Smith",
>   "age": 25
> }
> ```

### Syntax Highlighting

Many Markdown processors support syntax highlighting for fenced code blocks. This feature allows you to add color highlighting for whatever language your code was written in. To add syntax highlighting, specify a language next to the tick marks before the fenced code block.

~~~
```json
{
  "firstName": "John",
  "lastName": "Smith",
  "age": 25
}
```
~~~

where the rendered output looks like this:

> ```json
> {
>   "firstName": "John",
>   "lastName": "Smith",
>   "age": 25
> }
> ```

## Footnotes

Footnotes allow you to add notes and references without cluttering the body of the document. When you create a footnote, a superscript number with a link appears where you added the footnote reference. Readers can click the link to jump to the content of the footnote at the bottom of the page.

To create a footnote reference, add a caret and an identifier inside brackets (`[^1]`). Identifiers can be numbers or words, but they can't contain spaces or tabs. Identifiers only correlate the footnote reference with the footnote itself -- in the output, footnotes are numbered sequentially.

Add the footnote using another caret and number inside brackets with a colon and text (`[^1]: My footnote.`). You don't have to put footnotes at the end of the document. You can put them anywhere except inside other elements like lists, block quotes, and tables:

```md
Here is a simple footnote[^1], and here is a longer one[^note].

[^1]: This is the 1st footnote.

[^note]: And here is a 2nd one;

    indent paragraphs to include them in the footnote,
    insert code or add as many paragraphs as you like.
```

## Heading IDs

Many Markdown processors support custom IDs for headings -- some Markdown processors automatically add them. Adding custom IDs allows you to link directly to headings and modify them with CSS.

To add a custom heading ID, enclose the custom ID in curly braces on the same line as the heading:

```md
### My Great Heading {#custom-id}
```

where the HTML is rendered as:

> ```html
> <h3 id="custom-id">My Great Heading</h3>
> ```

## Linking to Heading IDs

You can link to headings with custom IDs in the file by creating a standard link with a number sign (`#`) followed by the custom heading ID.

| Markdown | HTML |
| :------- | ---: |
| `[Heading IDs](#heading-ids)` | `<a href="#heading-ids">Heading IDs</a>` |

Other websites can link to the heading by adding the custom heading ID to the full URL of the web-page (e.g., `[Heading IDs](https://www.markdownguide.org/extended-syntax#heading-ids)`).

## Definition Lists

Some Markdown processors allow you to create *definition lists* of terms and their corresponding definitions. To create a definition list, type the term on the first line. On the next line, type a colon followed by a space and the definition.

```md
1st Term
: This is the definition of the first term.

2nd Term
: This is one definition of the second term.
: This is another definition of the second term.
```

where the HTML is rendered as:

> ```html
> <dl>
>   <dt>1st Term</dt>
>   <dd>This is the definition of the first term.</dd>
>   <dt>2nd Term</dt>
>   <dd>This is one definition of the second term. </dd>
>   <dd>This is another definition of the second term.</dd>
> </dl>
> ```

## Strike-through

You can "strike-through" words by putting a horizontal line through the center of them. The result looks ~~like this~~. This feature allows you to indicate that certain words are a mistake not meant for inclusion in the document.

To strike-through words, use two tilde symbols (`~~`) before and after the words:

```md
~~The world is flat.~~ We now know that the world is round.
```

## Task Lists

Task lists allow you to create a list of items with check-boxes. In Markdown applications that support task lists, check-boxes will be displayed next to the content.

To create a task list, add dashes (`-`) and brackets with a space (<code>[&nbsp;]</code>) in front of task list items. To select a check-box, add an x in between the brackets (`[x]`):

```md
- [x] Write the press release
- [ ] Update the website
- [ ] Contact the media
```

## Automatic URL Linking

Many Markdown processors automatically turn URLs into links. That means if you type http://www.example.com, your Markdown processor will automatically turn it into a link even though you have not used brackets.

```md
http://www.example.com
```

### Disabling URL Linking

If you do not want a URL to be automatically linked, you can remove the link by denoting the URL as code with tick marks:

```md
`http://www.example.com`
```

[LaTex]: https://www.latex-project.org/
[MathJax]: https://www.mathjax.org/
